---
title: Statistical modelling with citizen science data for the local shorebirds on the Mornington Peninsula
summary: Study 2
tags:
- PhD
---

Climate change has been identified as a possible threat to the biodiversity of shorebirds on the Mornington Peninsula with specific species vulnerabilities likely to be important in both protected and unprotected areas. Due to the lack of comprehensive survey data this study uses citizen science bird counts, extracted from the Atlas of Living Australia, to determine for which species climate change is likely to be more of a threat and to determine which species benefit more from protected areas. In all cases analyses are conducted using temporal models fitted using the Integrated Laplace Approximation (INLA) method. The trends for six local shorebird species were compared to the Australian Pied Oystercatcher, with significantly steeper upward trends identified for the Black-fronted Dotterel, Red-capped Dotterel and Red-kneed Dotterel. Also, while protected areas were associated with greater numbers of the locally threatened Hooded Plover and Sooty Oystercatcher than unprotected areas, there was a significant upward trend for Sooty Oystercatchers which was particularly obvious in protected areas. However, warmer years saw a significant reduction in bird counts for the Hooded Plover on the Mornington Peninsula. This work suggests that, with some limitations, statistical models can be used with citizen science data for monitoring the persistence of local shorebirds and for investigating factors that are impacting these data. The results for the locally threatened Hooded Plover and Sooty Oystercatcher in protected areas are particularly encouraging, although the higher temperatures expected in the future may adversely affect the Hooded Plover.
