---
title: Modelling the recovery of local shorebirds using citizen science data following a fox eradication program 
summary: Study 3
tags:
- PhD
---

In the past fox predation was the greatest land-based threat for shorebird colonies on Phillip Island, Victoria, Australia. Regular fox control for 20 years reduced the fox population, but shorebirds and seabirds including the Little Penguin continued to be decimated. Therefore, a fox eradication program was started in 2006, with three phases called knock-down, clean-up and post-eradication. An effective knock-down was declared in 2011, heralding the start of the clean-up phase. The impact of fox eradication on local shorebirds has never been thoroughly assessed in this context. This study aims to track the recovery of six local shorebird species found on Philip Island including the locally threatened Hooded Plover and Sooty Oystercatcher. The methods used break new ground for assessing the recovery of bird species populations during a successful pest eradication program. We have used citizen science data for 2003 to 2017, extracted from the Atlas of Living Australia. The first method used is INLA modelling assuming a Poisson distribution for bird counts, in order to test for upward trends in shorebird numbers during the fox eradication program. The second method involves changepoint analyses to test whether the successive phases of the eradication process relate to changes in bird count levels. Most shorebird species considered exhibited significant positive trends over this period and all changepoint methods consistently identified the start of the clean-up phase. However, there was less consistency in the case of the start of the knock-down phase. The INLA models suggest a significant increase in the number of shorebirds for most species since 2006, with a negative relationship between the number of shorebirds and the estimated number of remaining foxes for all species. Agreement in the changepoints identified by the four changepoint methods suggests that for all these shorebird species, changes in bird numbers were linked to the timing of the eradication program’s clean-up phase. These methods show some promise for monitoring the recovery of native species during conservation programs; however, the use of citizen science data is a serious limitation of this study. 
