---
title: Statistical models for the persistence of Hooded Plover on Mornington Peninsula using citizen science data 
summary: Study 1
tags:
- PhD
---

Extinction of bird species has become too frequent a theme around the world. In 2015 BirdLife International estimated that 13% of bird species are threatened with extinction. Determining whether a bird species has become extinct or extant has become a difficult exercise due to survey efforts being too costly. However, due of citizen science data, the number of sightings has increased over the years (e.g. the eBird database increased by more than 20 million sightings from 2012 to 2018).
The Hooded Plover is listed as a vulnerable bird species under the IUCN red list assessment criteria. In this study we compare two different models to identify the effect of climate on extinction risk for the Hooded Plover in the Mornington Peninsula in both temporal and spatio-temporal scales. Such models are needed for developing effective strategies to conserve threatened species while identifying the factors associated with persistence and extinction. In order to clarify the effect of climate on the persistence of the Hooded Plover we have used the citizen science data available from eBird, which has a large amount of validated observational data. The Hooded Plover is a non-migratory local shorebird in Australia. Therefore, we considered monthly data for our study. Initially probability of persistence model is used as a reference for determining the level of persistence for this bird species. To quantify any climate effects, we have considered the mean monthly temperature, and total monthly rainfall in Zero Inflated models and Hurdle models. To control the growth in citizen science data, we also included the resident human population of the Mornington Peninsula in our models. Citizen science count data often includes excess zeros for rare species like the Hooded Plover in specific areas or time periods. Therefore, we compared Zero Inflated models and Hurdle models using Poisson and Negative Binomial abundance distributions while using count data with temporal and spatio-temporal structures. In both the temporal and spatio-temporal models the performance of the Negative Binomial Hurdle model was superior. Similar conclusions can be drawn from both these models. Population has a significantly negative effect on average Hooded Plover counts (i.e. lower counts of Hooded Plover are associated with higher population) which means growth in citizen science effort, linked to population growth is negatively affect for Hooded Plover counts. The predictor variables of climate (temperature and rainfall) are not significantly affected for the persistence of Hooded Plover. This work shows that statistical models can be used to address the challenges associated with the use of citizen science data for monitoring the persistence of rare birds, while identifying factors affecting this persistence such as climate.
